>> Brian Holt: Let's talk
about testing custom hooks.
Like one of the big reasons that we
actually want to use custom hooks,
so we're gonna test,
use pizza of the day here.
But it's really nice that we have
these custom hooks because it,
they've become extremely easy to test.
And then you can make sure,
epecially if you have this important
hook that's used in a bunch of places.
Again, if we're showing pizza everywhere,
and we particularly use pizza of the day,
we're gonna use this in 30
different places in our code bases.
We can test this in various different ways
to make sure that it works across various
different environments, becomes a very
well stable and reliable piece of code.
The thing that makes me laugh about some
of these tests, though, is they almost
always end up being longer than the
component themselves, it's very normal.
Create a new file here, call it
usePizzaOfTheDay.test.jsx, okay?
We're gonna say import expect,
test ,vi, from vitest.
Import render from
@testing-library/react
>> Brian Holt: And
import createFetchMock.
>> Brian Holt: From vitest-fetch-mock,
and then of course, import,
so pizza, use pizza the day.
Yeah, for whatever reason,
I did this as a named export.
It's so weird that I would do that, but
I did, so
we're going to import it that way.
>> Brian Holt: usePizzaUpTheDay,
like that.
>> Brian Holt: const fetchMocker
= createFetchMock,
all things that we've done before,
pass in vi,
fetchMocker.enableMocks, there we go.
We're gonna make a testpizza here.
>> Brian Holt: So I put calabrese in here.
>> Brian Holt: I think I literally
just grabbed this out of the database.
So "The calabrese pizza".
>> Brian Holt: Category, "Supreme".
I guess it's a supreme style pizza and
description.
I'm not writing all that, so it's just
gonna be something shorter than that.
So "lol pizza from Calabria" and
image is /public/pizzas
/calabrese.webp.
And then the sizes is,
this is the prices, right,
12.25, 16.25,
and the large is 20.25.
Okay, good test pizza there.
>> Brian Holt: So, how do you render
a hook outside of a component,
that's a trick question, you can't right,
a hook really works in
the context of a component.
So we're gonna say function
getPizzaOfTheDay and we're just gonna fake it out.
We're gonna say, let pizza
>> Brian Holt: Function,
TestComponent.
>> Brian Holt: We're gonna say,
pizza = UsePizzaOfTheDay and
return null.
>> Brian Holt: We're gonna say
render(), and
then we're just going to return pizza,
right?
That should work.
>> Brian Holt: So it's gonna create a test
component that doesn't render anything,
all it's gonna do is
just call the component.
We're going to go as far to render
the component and throw it away cuz we
actually don't really care what it renders
out at the end, it's gonna be null.
But we're going to just keep that pizza
variable that it gets back from use pizza
the day, and we're going to
return whatever that pizza is.
>> Brian Holt: What is
pizza the first time?
>> Brian Holt: Null, right,
usePizzaOfTheDay, what is it the first time, null,
and then it calls the useEffect,
right?
And then that's what we're
gonna get on subsequent, right?
So, let's write a test of that, right?
We wanna make sure that it's not giving
us something weird the first time.
Gives null when first called,
that's what we expect.
Async function, and we're gonna
say fetch.mockResponseOnce,
mockResponseOnce.
I'm gonna say,
JSON.stringify(testPizza),
const pizza =
getPizzaOfTheDay, and
expect pizza to be null.
>> Brian Holt: There we go, it works,
let's go make it something else.
Use pizza of the day,
we want this to now return.
>> Brian Holt: And there we go,
it expected null and it got lol.
So that's not gonna work, there we go, null.
>> Brian Holt: Now,
you might be looking at this like,
this seems like it's kinda weird, right?
That we're like faking a component
to get a hook out of it.
And I wanted you to see how to do this
because I'm gonna show you how to just use
the, what is it called,
renderHook function,
which just does all of this for you.
But I wanted to demystify a little
bit as like what this is doing for
it doesn't do very much, right?
It's just it's making a fake component.
It's rendering it once and
then it's giving stuff out of it.
That's all that this thing does for you.
But we're gonna make this so
much simpler now.
Get rid of all this just garbage,
get pizza of the day, no one likes that,
and we're gonna get this function
here called renderHook from React.
So instead of render,
we want renderHook like this.
Then what we want instead is,
on this line we're gonna say
const result = renderHook, and
you give it a function to call,
usePizzaOfTheDay like this.
>> Brian Holt: And then we're gonna
expect result.current to be null.
>> Brian Holt: This got
a lot more succinct, right?
This looks a little strange,
right, but at the same time,
it's way less code that we have to write.
All this is doing is this is creating
a fake component underneath the hood and
then calls this function,
which is gonna call our hook for us.
And then we're just pulling
up the results there.
>> Brian Holt: Does that make sense?
>> Brian Holt: Yeah.
>> Speaker 2: Just wondering about the
formatting on line 20 const result
in curly brackets.
Is that because you said "pulling it out".
Is it a more complex object and
we're just taking something
called results, okay, cool.
>> Brian Holt: Same thing, yep, you're
just destructuring what you get back out
of it, and
let's make sure I'm not telling you lies.
But yeah, that that passes pretty cool,
just love the vitest tools as well.
Like they're just so nice to work with.
It's very easy to run all of
your tests all at once, or
rerun certain ones of them, like let's say
I only wanna run certain patterns of them.
You can hit f to only rerun failed tests,
which I don't have any so
it's not doing that right now,
you can write a filter.
So let's say I just want,
I could put like contact and
then it'd be like, okay,
I'll only rerun that test for you.
It's just a very nice tool to work with,
but it just hit h to show this and
it'll show you all the different
things that it can do.
>> Brian Holt: Okay, so
let's add another test.
It's not super interesting that it's
just getting null the first time.
So let's write another test here that we
make sure that it calls the right API.
We're gonna add another one up here
under testing library called waitFor,
we'll use that in just a second
test to call the API and
give back the pizza of the day, async.
I can spell promise.
>> Brian Holt: Okay, fetch, you can
actually just grab that from the top one
here as well, so I'm gonna grab that,
I don't even know if this is necessary,
if we're being honest,
>> Brian Holt: const
result = renderHook,
same thing here.
>> Brian Holt: usePizzaOfTheDay,
I don't know why we're giving
an empty string there,
you don't have to, await
waitFor, and it's kind of the same way
with the one that we were using before.
We were just saying, hey, wait till
this happens and it looks like this.
So we're gonna say, waitFor
expect result.current to
equal testPizza, okay?
And then you just expect fetchMocker
to be called with, toBeCalledWith
>> Brian Holt: api/pizza-of-the-day.
So let me explain a little
bit more on waitFor.
It's kind of an interesting API.
waitFor, basically says run this function
continually until it no longer throws
an error.
What does expect do when it fails
the test, throws an error, right?
So you're basically saying like,
run this expectation again and
again until it doesn't throw an error,
right?
So until this test passed,
essentially run this again.
And this one will wait a little
bit longer than our other one,
I think It'll wait quite a while before,
I don't say quite a while, but
several seconds before it
actually ends up failing.
So let's see how we did here.
It did work, but let's just,
if you did this, it should wait a while.
Yeah, I mean it's like two
seconds there at that time.
But there you go,
waitFor is quite nice as well.
Now, this is a pretty
well-tested little hook, right?
We can now be pretty confident in
using this all over our code base.
At least with null and with proper data,
it's gonna work, right?
So, I like that,
you might need to test like an error case,
like what happens if pizza of the day
doesn't come back with something?
Or what if there isn't one for
that day or something like that, you might
have to add some of those edge cases.
But at least the happy
paths are all covered.
The happy pizzas, as one might say.